Updated detailed steps for migrating blocks from Thanos to Mimir. (#3290)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/migration-guide/migrating-from-thanos-or-prometheus.md

For best query performance, only upload Thanos blocks from a single Prometheus replica from each HA pair.
If you upload blocks from both replicas, the query results returned by Mimir will include samples from both replicas.

**Grafana Mimir does not support Thanos’ _downsampling_ feature.**
To guarantee query results correctness please only upload original (raw) Thanos blocks into Mimir's storage.
If you also upload blocks with downsampled data (ie. blocks with non-zero `Resolution` field in `meta.json` file), Grafana Mimir will merge raw samples and downsampled samples together at the query time.
This may cause that incorrect results are returned for the query.

> ## Migrating historic TSDB blocks from Thanos to Grafana Mimir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrate historic TSDB blocks from Thanos to Grafana Mimir
```
We have shifted from -ing (gerunds) for tasks to imperatives (commands).

1) Copy the blocks from Thanos's bucket to an Intermediate bucket

   Create an intermediate object storage bucket(S3,GCS,etc.) in your cloud provider where you can copy the historical blocks and work on them before uploading to the Mimir bucket.

    For AWS S3, use the aws tool in the following command:

    ```bash
    aws s3 cp -r s3://<THANOS-BUCKET> s3://<TENANT>/<DIRECTORY>
    ```

    For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), use the gsutil tool in the following command:
    
    ```bash
    gsutil -m cp -r gs://<THANOS-BUCKET>/* gs://<INTERMEDIATE-MIMIR-BUCKET>/
    ```
    
    Once the copy process is done, inspect the blocks in the bucket to ensure it's valid from Thanos perspective.
    
    ```bash
    thanos tools bucket inspect --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml

>     ```

Author: This command gives us an output very similar to the output in the store gateway endpoint where we can check the block's metadata like block id, compaction levels, external labels, resolution, etc., which will be helpful for us in further steps. You can even export this as a CSV.
<img width="1368" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/114397475/197557084-87bf1288-9ac9-4dd9-84c7-5c890656b056.png">

2) Remove the downsampled blocks

   Mimir doesn't understand the downsampled blocks(ie. blocks with non-zero Resolution field in meta.json file) in Thanos. Therefore we need to remove the 5m and 1h downsampled blocks from this bucket.
   
   Mark the downsampled blocks for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket retention --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --retention.resolution-1h=2h --retention.resolution-5m=2h --retention.resolution-raw=0d
   ```
   Cleanup the blocks marked for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
3) Remove the duplicated blocks

   If two replicas of Prometheus instancesare deployed for HA, then only upload the blocks from one of the replicas and drop the other.
   
   ```bash

>    thanos tools bucket inspect --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --output=tsv | grep prometheus_replica=<PROMETHEUS-REPLICA-TO-DROP> | awk '{print $1}' | xargs -n 1 -P 1 thanos tools bucket mark --marker="deletion-mark.json" --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --details="Removed as duplicate" --id

Reviewer 2: This command combines several steps into one long pipeline.

Can we split it into multiple commands with a comment? Something like:

```bash
# Get list of all blocks in the bucket
thanos tools bucket inspect --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --output=tsv > blocks.tsv

# Find blocks from replica that we will drop
cat blocks.tsv | grep prometheus_replica=<PROMETHEUS-REPLICA-TO-DROP> | awk '{print $1}' > blocks_to_drop.tsv

# Mark found blocks for deletion
for ID in $(cat blocks_to_drop.tsv); do
  thanos tools bucket mark --marker="deletion-mark.json" --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --details="Removed as duplicate" --id=$ID
done
```

Author: We can split the command but the thing with "for" loop is that they tend to process one item at a time and this is where xargs has an advantage - it can batch up the arguments to allow one command to process lots of items. Also when we go for loop here we will have to maintain so many files as well. May be I can give a small description of what the command does. Will that be okay rather than splitting the command?

Reviewer 2: `xargs -n 1` will call the command once per block anyway, right? What is the difference then?

Author: Yeah in this command, we are not using any batching since the max procs we are using is 1. If you feel that would be easier to follow then let's adopt that.

   Again cleanup the duplicate blocks marked for deletion.
  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **ProTip!**: If you want to visualize what exactly is happening in the blocks with respect to the source of blocks, labels, compaction levels, etc, you can use the below command to get the output as CSV and import it to a google sheet.
   > ```bash 
   > thanos tools bucket inspect --objstore.config-file bucket-prod.yaml --output=csv >> thanos-blocks.csv
   > ```

4) Relabel the blocks with external labels

   Relabel the blocks with the required external labels. Create a rewrite config like the following:
   
   ```bash
   # relabel-config.yaml
   - action: replace
     target_label: "<LABEL-KEY>"
     replacement: "<LABEL-VALUE"
   ```
   
   Perform the rewrite dry run to confirm all work well.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket rewrite  --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml --dry-run --id
   ```
   
   After confirming that the rewrite is working as expected in **--dry-run**, you can apply the changes with the **--no-dry-run** flag.
   
   ```bash

>    thanos tools bucket rewrite  --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml --no-dry-run --delete-blocks --id

Reviewer 2: This needs to be run for all blocks in the bucket, right? `--id` parameter at the end is missing block ID. (Same comment for "dry run" above)

Author: My bad I missed adding the first part of the command. Since I am using xarg we don't have to pass the id specifically there it will be automatically passed. If I would have used the for loop then i need to value through a variable there.

   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:28.675240198Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1231 msg="uploading new block" source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.922348564Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1241 msg=uploaded source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.979696873Z caller=block.go:203 msg="block has been marked for deletion" block=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.979832767Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1249 msg="rewrite done" IDs=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.980197796Z caller=main.go:161 msg=exiting
   ```
   
   
   Cleanup the original blocks which are marked for deletion.
  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **Note**: If there are multiple prometheus clusters and the process of relabelling each of them parallely would speed up the process.
   > Get the blocks ids of the blocks that are responsible for the cluster and write a for loop to iterate over them.
   > ```bash

>    > thanos tools bucket inspect --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --output=tsv | grep <PROMETHEUS-CLUSTER-NAME> | awk '{print $1}' | xargs -n 1 -P 1 > prod-blocks.txt

Reviewer 2: What does `xargs -n 1 -P 1` at the end do here?

   >```
  
   >```bash

>    > for i in `cat prod-blocks.txt`; do thanos tools bucket rewrite  --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml --id $i --no-dry-run --delete-blocks; done

Reviewer 2: Format to multiple lines for easier reading:

```suggestion
   > for i in $(cat prod-blocks.txt);
   > do
   >     thanos tools bucket rewrite \
   >         --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
   >         --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
   >         --no-dry-run \
   >         --delete-blocks \
   >         --id $i
   > done
```

  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **Tip:** If you want to visualize exactly what is happening in the blocks, with respect to the source of blocks, external labels, compaction levels, and more, you can use the following command to get the output as CSV and import it into a Google spreadsheet:
   > ```bash 
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket-prod.yaml \
   >     --output=csv > thanos-blocks.csv
   > ```

4. Relabel the blocks with external labels.

   Mimir doesn’t inject external labels from the `meta.json` file into query results. Therefore, you need to relabel the blocks with the required external labels in the `meta.json` file. 
   
   > **Note:** You can get the external labels in the `meta.json` file of each block from the CSV file that is imported (as mentioned in the preceding tip), and build the rewrite configuration accordingly.
   
   Create a rewrite configuration that is similar to this:
   
   ```bash
   # relabel-config.yaml
   - action: replace
     target_label: "<LABEL-KEY>"

>      replacement: "<LABEL-VALUE"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     replacement: "<LABEL-VALUE>"
```

Author: Done

   ```
   
   Perform the rewrite dry run to confirm all works well.
   
   ```bash
   # Get list of all blocks in the bucket after removing the depuplicate and downsampled blocks.
   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --output=tsv > blocks-to-rewrite.tsv
   
   # Check if rewrite of the blocks with external labels is working as expected.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --dry-run \
           --id $ID
   done
   ```
   

>    After you confirm that the rewrite is working as expected via `--dry-run`, apply the changes with the `--no-dry-run` flag. Remember to include `--delete-blocks, otherwise the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   After you confirm that the rewrite is working as expected via `--dry-run`, apply the changes with the `--no-dry-run` flag. Remember to include `--delete-blocks`, otherwise the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.
```

   
   Use the below script to remove the labels from the meta.json.
   
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash

   BUCKET="GCS Bucket name"

   echo "Fetching list of meta.json files (this can take a while if there are many blocks)"
   gsutil ls "gs://$BUCKET/*/meta.json" > meta-files.txt

   echo "Processing meta.json files"
   for FILE in $(cat meta-files.txt); do
      echo "Removing Thanos labels from $FILE"
      ORIG_META_JSON=$(gsutil cat "$FILE")
      UPDATED_META_JSON=$(echo "$ORIG_META_JSON" | jq "del(.thanos.labels)")

      if ! diff -u <( echo "$ORIG_META_JSON" | jq . ) <( echo "$UPDATED_META_JSON" | jq .) > /dev/null; then
         echo "Backing up $FILE to $FILE.orig"
         gsutil cp "$FILE" "$FILE.orig"
         echo "Uploading modified $FILE"
         echo "$UPDATED_META_JSON" | gsutil cp - "$FILE"
      else
         echo "No diff for $FILE"
      fi
   done
   ```
   
6. Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket.
  
   Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket using the below gsutil command.
  
   ```bash

>    gsutil -m cp -r gs://<mimir-intermediate-bucket> gs://<mimir-gcs-bucket>/<TENANT>/

Reviewer 3: Do you mind showing the AWS command as well, like you did at the top of the section?

Author: @pracucci I have updated the doc with the command for AWS as well. Thanks.

For best query performance, only upload Thanos blocks from a single Prometheus replica from each HA pair.
If you upload blocks from both replicas, the query results returned by Mimir will include samples from both replicas.

**Grafana Mimir does not support Thanos’ _downsampling_ feature.**
To guarantee query results correctness please only upload original (raw) Thanos blocks into Mimir's storage.
If you also upload blocks with downsampled data (ie. blocks with non-zero `Resolution` field in `meta.json` file), Grafana Mimir will merge raw samples and downsampled samples together at the query time.
This may cause that incorrect results are returned for the query.

## Migrate historic TSDB blocks from Thanos to Grafana Mimir

> 1) Copy the blocks from Thanos's bucket to an Intermediate bucket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the blocks from Thanos's bucket to an Intermediate bucket.
```

>    Create an intermediate object storage bucket(S3,GCS,etc.) in your cloud provider where you can copy the historical blocks and work on them before uploading to the Mimir bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Create an intermediate object storage bucket (such as Amazon S3 or GCS) within your cloud provider, where you can copy the historical blocks and work on them before uploading them to the Mimir bucket.
```

   
   > **Note**: It is recommeneded to run all of the following steps in a **screen** or **tmux** command to avoid any interruptions as these may take time depending on the amount of data to be processed.

>     For AWS S3, use the aws tool in the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For Amazon S3, use the `aws` tool in the following command:
```

    ```bash
    aws s3 cp -r s3://<THANOS-BUCKET> s3://<TENANT>/<DIRECTORY>
    ```

>     For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), use the gsutil tool in the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), use the `gsutil` tool in the following command:
```

    
    ```bash
    gsutil -m cp -r gs://<THANOS-BUCKET>/* gs://<INTERMEDIATE-MIMIR-BUCKET>/
    ```
    

>     Once the copy process is done, inspect the blocks in the bucket to ensure it's valid from Thanos perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    After the copy process completes, inspect the blocks in the bucket to make sure that they are valid from a Thanos perspective.
```

    
    ```bash
    thanos tools bucket inspect \
        --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml
    ```

> 2) Remove the downsampled blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Remove the downsampled blocks.
```

>    Mimir doesn't understand the downsampled blocks from Thanos (ie. blocks with non-zero `Resolution` field in meta.json file). Therefore we need to remove the 5m and 1h downsampled blocks from this bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Mimir doesn’t understand the downsampled blocks from Thanos, such as blocks with a non-zero `Resolution` field in the `meta.json` file. Therefore, you need to remove the `5m` and `1h` downsampled blocks from this bucket.
```

>    Mark the downsampled blocks for deletion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Mark the downsampled blocks for deletion:
```

   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket retention \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --retention.resolution-1h=1s \
       --retention.resolution-5m=1s \
       --retention.resolution-raw=0s
   ```
   Cleanup the blocks marked for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  

> 3) Remove the duplicated blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Remove the duplicated blocks.
```

>    If two replicas of Prometheus instances are deployed for HA, then only upload the blocks from one of the replicas and drop the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If two replicas of Prometheus instances are deployed for high-availability, then only upload the blocks from one of the replicas and drop the other.
```

Reviewer: @pstibrany, the other block, right? Please vet for technical accuracy.

Author: It's other replica.

   
   ```bash
   # Get list of all blocks in the bucket
   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --output=tsv > blocks.tsv
       
   # Find blocks from replica that we will drop    
   cat blocks.tsv| grep prometheus_replica=<PROMETHEUS-REPLICA-TO-DROP> \
       | awk '{print $1}' > blocks_to_drop.tsv
       
   # Mark found blocks for deletion
   for ID in $(cat blocks_to_drop.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket mark \
          --marker="deletion-mark.json" \
          --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
          --details="Removed as duplicate" \
          --id $ID
   done
   ```
   

>    > **Note**: Replace **prometheus_replica** with the unique label that would differentiate prometheus replicas in your setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Note:** Replace `prometheus_replica` with the unique label that would differentiate Prometheus replicas in your setup.
```

>    Again cleanup the duplicate blocks marked for deletion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Clean up the duplicate blocks marked for deletion again:
```

  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  

>    > **ProTip!**: If you want to visualize what exactly is happening in the blocks with respect to the source of blocks, external labels, compaction levels, etc, you can use the below command to get the output as CSV and import it to a google sheet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Tip:** If you want to visualize exactly what is happening in the blocks, with respect to the source of blocks, external labels, compaction levels, and more, you can use the following command to get the output as CSV and import it into a Google spreadsheet:
```

   > ```bash 
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket-prod.yaml \
   >     --output=csv > thanos-blocks.csv
   > ```

> 4) Relabel the blocks with external labels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Relabel the blocks with external labels.
```

   Mimir doesn't inject external labels from the `meta.json` file into query results. Therefore we relabel the blocks with the required external labels in the `meta.json`. 
   

>    > **Note**: You can get the external labels in the meta.json of each block from the CSV file imported in the above **ProTip** and build the rewrite config accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **Note:** You can get the external labels in the `meta.json` file of each block from the CSV file that is imported (as mentioned in the preceding tip), and build the rewrite configuration accordingly.
```

>    Create a rewrite config like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Create a rewrite configuration that is similar to this:
```

   
   ```bash
   # relabel-config.yaml
   - action: replace
     target_label: "<LABEL-KEY>"
     replacement: "<LABEL-VALUE"
   ```
   

>    Perform the rewrite dry run to confirm all work well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Perform the rewrite dry run to confirm all work well.
```
All what?

   
   ```bash
   # Get list of all blocks in the bucket after removing the depuplicate and downsampled blocks.
   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --output=tsv > blocks-to-rewrite.tsv
   
   # Check if rewrite of the blocks with external labels is working as expected.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --dry-run \
           --id $ID
   done
   ```
   

>    After confirming that the rewrite is working as expected in **--dry-run**, you can apply the changes with the **--no-dry-run** flag. Don't forget to include **--delete-blocks**, otherwise the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   After you confirm that the rewrite is working as expected via `--dry-run`, apply the changes with the `--no-dry-run` flag. Remember to include `--delete-blocks, otherwise the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.
```

   >```
 
5) Remove external labels from meta.json
   
   Mimir compactor will not be able to compact the blocks having external labels with Mimir's own blocks that don't have any such labels in their meta.json. Therefore these external labels have to be removed before copying them to the Mimir bucket.
   
   Use the below script to remove the labels from the meta.json.
   
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash

   BUCKET="GCS Bucket name"

   echo "Fetching list of meta.json files (this can take a while if there are many blocks)"
   gsutil ls "gs://$BUCKET/*/meta.json" > meta-files.txt

   echo "Processing meta.json files"
   for FILE in $(cat meta-files.txt); do
      echo "Removing Thanos labels from $FILE"
      ORIG_META_JSON=$(gsutil cat "$FILE")
      UPDATED_META_JSON=$(echo "$ORIG_META_JSON" | jq "del(.thanos.labels)")

      if ! diff -u <( echo "$ORIG_META_JSON" | jq . ) <( echo "$UPDATED_META_JSON" | jq .) > /dev/null; then
         echo "Backing up $FILE to $FILE.orig"
         gsutil cp "$FILE" "$FILE.orig"
         echo "Uploading modified $FILE"
         echo "$UPDATED_META_JSON" | gsutil cp - "$FILE"
      else
         echo "No diff for $FILE"
      fi
   done
   ```
   

> 6) Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket.
```

  
   Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket.
  
   ```bash
   gsutil -m cp -r gs://<mimir-intermediate-bucket> gs://<mimir-gcs-bucket>/<TENANT>/

>    ```

Reviewer: Line 314 is a duplicate of line 312.

> 7) Mimir compactor updates bucket index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Mimir compactor updates the bucket index.
```
This is not an action that a user performs, so therefore it is not part of the action steps.

Reviewer: Check indentation so that it is part of additional context for step 6.

>    Historical blocks will not be available for querying as soon as they are uploaded, because the bucket index with the list of all available blocks needs to be updated by the compactor first. Compactor typically does this update every 15 minutes. Once this is done, other components like querier or store-gateway will be able to work with these the historical blocks, and blocks will be available for querying through Grafana. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Historical blocks are not available for querying immediately after they are uploaded because the bucket index with the list of all available blocks first needs to be updated by the compactor. The compactor typically perform such an update every 15 minutes. After an update completes, other components such as the querier or store-gateway are able to work with the historical blocks, and the blocks are available for querying through Grafana. 
```

>    You can check the storegateway HTTP endpoint at `http://<STORE-GATEWAY-ENDPOINT>/store-gateway/tenant/<TENANT-NAME>/blocks` and you should be able to see the uploaded blocks there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Check the `store-gateway` HTTP endpoint at `http://<STORE-GATEWAY-ENDPOINT>/store-gateway/tenant/<TENANT-NAME>/blocks` to verify that the uploaded blocks are there.
```

   cat blocks.tsv| grep prometheus_replica=<PROMETHEUS-REPLICA-TO-DROP> \
       | awk '{print $1}' > blocks_to_drop.tsv
       
   # Mark found blocks for deletion
   for ID in $(cat blocks_to_drop.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket mark \
          --marker="deletion-mark.json" \
          --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
          --details="Removed as duplicate" \
          --id $ID
   done
   ```
   
   > **Note**: Replace **prometheus_replica** with the unique label that would differentiate prometheus replicas in your setup.

   Again cleanup the duplicate blocks marked for deletion.
  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **ProTip!**: If you want to visualize what exactly is happening in the blocks with respect to the source of blocks, external labels, compaction levels, etc, you can use the below command to get the output as CSV and import it to a google sheet.
   > ```bash 
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket-prod.yaml \
   >     --output=csv > thanos-blocks.csv
   > ```

4) Relabel the blocks with external labels

>    Mimir doesn't inject external labels from the meta.json into query results. Therefore we relabel the blocks with the required external labels in the meta.json. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Mimir doesn't inject external labels from the `meta.json` file into query results. Therefore we relabel the blocks with the required external labels in the `meta.json`. 
```

   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --output=tsv > blocks-to-rewrite.tsv
   
   # Check if rewrite of the blocks with external labels is working as expected.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --dry-run \
           --id $ID
   done
   ```
   
   After confirming that the rewrite is working as expected in **--dry-run**, you can apply the changes with the **--no-dry-run** flag. Don't forget to include **--delete-blocks**, otherwise the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   # Rewrite the blocks with external labels and mark the original blocks for deletion.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite  \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --no-dry-run \
           --delete-blocks \
           --id $ID
   done
   ```
   
   The output of relabelling of every block would look like something below.
   

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ```console
```

   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.980197796Z caller=main.go:161 msg=exiting
   ```
   
   
   Cleanup the original blocks which are marked for deletion.
  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **Note**: If there are multiple prometheus clusters, then relabelling each of them in parallel may speed up the entire process.
   > Get the list of blocks that for each cluster, and process it separately.
   > ```bash
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
   >     --output=tsv \
   >     | grep <PROMETHEUS-CLUSTER-NAME> \
   >     | awk '{print $1}' > prod-blocks.tsv
   >```
  
   >```bash
   > for ID in `cat prod-blocks.tsv`
   > do
   >     thanos tools bucket rewrite  \
   >        --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
   >        --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
   >        --delete-blocks \
   >        --no-dry-run \
   >        --id $ID         
   > done
   >```
 
5) Remove external labels from meta.json
   

>    Mimir compactor will not be able to compact the blocks with external labels in their meta.json. Therefore these external labels have to be  removed before copying them to the Mimir bucket.

Reviewer 2: This isn't quite correct. Mimir compactor can compact blocks with external labels just fine, but only with other blocks using the same external labels. Since Mimir's own blocks don't have any such labels, we remove labels from these imported blocks too.

   
   Use the below script to remove the labels from the meta.json.
   
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash

   BUCKET="GCS Bucket name"

   echo "Fetching list of meta.json files (this can take a while if there are many blocks)"
   gsutil ls "gs://$BUCKET/*/meta.json" > meta-files.txt

   echo "Processing meta.json files"
   for FILE in $(cat meta-files.txt); do
      echo "Removing Thanos labels from $FILE"
      ORIG_META_JSON=$(gsutil cat "$FILE")
      UPDATED_META_JSON=$(echo "$ORIG_META_JSON" | jq "del(.thanos.labels)")

      if ! diff -u <( echo "$ORIG_META_JSON" | jq . ) <( echo "$UPDATED_META_JSON" | jq .) > /dev/null; then
         echo "Backing up $FILE to $FILE.orig"
         gsutil cp "$FILE" "$FILE.orig"
         echo "Uploading modified $FILE"
         echo "$UPDATED_META_JSON" | gsutil cp - "$FILE"
      else
         echo "No diff for $FILE"
      fi
   done
   ```
   
   Clean up the original meta.json file which were backed using the below command.
   
   ```bash
   gsutil rm gs://<mimir-intermediate-bucket>/*/*.orig

>    ```

Reviewer 2: This is not required. These files will be ignored by Mimir, and can be left around for troubleshooting, if needed. If we don't want them, we can as well not upload them in the previous script.

   
6) Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket
  

>    Once the relabelling process is done, copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket.

Reviewer 2: Relabelling process was done in step 4. We don't need to refer to it in step 6.

  
   ```bash
   gsutil -m cp -r gs://<mimir-intermediate-bucket> gs://<mimir-gcs-bucket>/<TENANT>/
   ```
 
7) Mimir compactor updates bucket index
  
   Historical blocks will not be available for querying as soon as they are uploaded, because the bucket index with the list of all available blocks needs to be updated by the compactor first. Compactor typically does this update every 15 minutes. Once this is done, other components like querier or store-gateway will be able to work with these the historical blocks, and blocks will be available for querying through Grafana. 
   

>    You can check the storegateway HTTP endpoint at ```http://<STORE-GATEWAY-ENDPOINT>/store-gateway/tenant/<TENANT-NAME>/blocks``` and you should be able to see the uploaded blocks there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You can check the storegateway HTTP endpoint at `http://<STORE-GATEWAY-ENDPOINT>/store-gateway/tenant/<TENANT-NAME>/blocks` and you should be able to see the uploaded blocks there.
```

Author: @pstibrany Thanks for the suggestions. I have made the changes as suggested.

If you also upload blocks with downsampled data (ie. blocks with non-zero `Resolution` field in `meta.json` file), Grafana Mimir will merge raw samples and downsampled samples together at the query time.
This may cause that incorrect results are returned for the query.

## Migrate historic TSDB blocks from Thanos to Grafana Mimir

1) Copy the blocks from Thanos's bucket to an Intermediate bucket

   Create an intermediate object storage bucket(S3,GCS,etc.) in your cloud provider where you can copy the historical blocks and work on them before uploading to the Mimir bucket.

    For AWS S3, use the aws tool in the following command:

    ```bash
    aws s3 cp -r s3://<THANOS-BUCKET> s3://<TENANT>/<DIRECTORY>
    ```

    For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), use the gsutil tool in the following command:
    
    ```bash
    gsutil -m cp -r gs://<THANOS-BUCKET>/* gs://<INTERMEDIATE-MIMIR-BUCKET>/
    ```
    
    Once the copy process is done, inspect the blocks in the bucket to ensure it's valid from Thanos perspective.
    
    ```bash
    thanos tools bucket inspect \
        --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml
    ```

2) Remove the downsampled blocks

>    Mimir doesn't understand the downsampled blocks(ie. blocks with non-zero Resolution field in meta.json file) in Thanos. Therefore we need to remove the 5m and 1h downsampled blocks from this bucket.

Author: Done

   
   Mark the downsampled blocks for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket retention \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --retention.resolution-1h=2h \

>        --retention.resolution-5m=2h \

Author: Yes, it makes sense. I have changed it.

       --retention.resolution-raw=0d
   ```
   Cleanup the blocks marked for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
3) Remove the duplicated blocks

>    If two replicas of Prometheus instancesare deployed for HA, then only upload the blocks from one of the replicas and drop the other.

Author: Done

   > ```bash 
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket-prod.yaml \
   >     --output=csv > thanos-blocks.csv
   > ```

4) Relabel the blocks with external labels

   Relabel the blocks with the required external labels. Create a rewrite config like the following:
   
   ```bash
   # relabel-config.yaml
   - action: replace
     target_label: "<LABEL-KEY>"
     replacement: "<LABEL-VALUE"
   ```
   
   Perform the rewrite dry run to confirm all work well.
   
   ```bash
   # Get list of all blocks in the bucket after removing the depuplicate and downsampled blocks.
   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --output=tsv > blocks-to-rewrite.tsv
   
   # Check if rewrite of the blocks with external labels is working as expected.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --dry-run \
           --id $ID
   done
   ```
   

>    After confirming that the rewrite is working as expected in **--dry-run**, you can apply the changes with the **--no-dry-run** flag. Don't forget to include **--delete-blocks**, if not the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.

Author: I have added the reason why we are relabelling and also added a note on how we can get the external labels from the protip I added in the previous step.

>    After confirming that the rewrite is working as expected in **--dry-run**, you can apply the changes with the **--no-dry-run** flag. Don't forget to include **--delete-blocks**, if not the original blocks will not be marked for deletion.

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:21.536267363Z caller=compactor.go:42 msg="processed 100.00% of 701243 series"
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:21.536466158Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1222 msg="wrote new block after modifications; flushing" source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:28.675240198Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1231 msg="uploading new block" source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.922348564Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1241 msg=uploaded source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.979696873Z caller=block.go:203 msg="block has been marked for deletion" block=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.979832767Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1249 msg="rewrite done" IDs=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.980197796Z caller=main.go:161 msg=exiting
   ```
   
   
   Cleanup the original blocks which are marked for deletion.
  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  

>    > **Note**: If there are multiple prometheus clusters and relabelling each of them parallely would speed up the entire process.

Author: Done

   ```
   
   Use the below script to remove the labels from the meta.json.
   
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash
   # Description: Update Thanos external labels
   # Create a folder called output
   mkdir -p output
   
   # Get all meta.json file under the orig folder
   find orig -name 'meta.json' |
   while read orig; do
     block="$(echo "${orig}" | cut -f2 -d'/')"
     tmpfile=$(mktemp)
   
     # use jq to delete the labels from the meta.sjon file
     jq 'del(.thanos.labels)' "${orig}" > "${tmpfile}"
   
     # check if there are changes in the tmpfile
     if ! diff -u <(jq -S . "${orig}") <(jq -S . "${tmpfile}") > /dev/null; then
        echo "Updating ${block}"
        mkdir -p "output/${block}"
        cp "${tmpfile}" "output/${block}/meta.json"
     else
        echo "No diff on ${block}"
     fi
     rm "${tmpfile}"
   done
   ```
   
   Sync the meta.json in the output folder and the blocks folder in the GCS bucket.
   
   ```bash
   for ID in $(ls -al ~/output/| awk '{print $9}')
   do
       gsutil -m rsync -r -x '.*(index|chunks|debug).*' ~/output/$ID gs://{mimir-intermediate-bucket}/$ID
   done

>    ```

Author: Yeah, this seems to be a better script and I have used the same as well.

   
6) Copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket
  
   Once the relabelling process is done, copy the blocks from the intermediate bucket to the Mimir bucket.
  
   ```bash

>    gsutil -m cp -r gs://<mimir-intermediate-bucket>/$i gs://<mimir-gcs-bucket>/<TENANT>/

Reviewer 2: `$i` seems wrong here.

Author: Corrected

   ```
 
7) Mimir compactor updates bucket index
  

>    The historical blocks will not be available for querying as soon as they are uploaded, as the bucket index to include all available blocks in the index have to be updated by the compactor and it would take time(depending on the number of blocks to be updated and the index updation normally runs every 15 minutes). Once this is done, other components like querier, store-gateway  will be able to work with these the historical blocks and they will be available for querying through Grafana. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Historical blocks will not be available for querying as soon as they are uploaded, because the bucket index with the list of all available blocks needs to be updated by the compactor first. Compactor typically does this update every 15 minutes. Once this is done, other components like querier or store-gateway will be able to work with these the historical blocks, and blocks will be available for querying through Grafana. 
```

Author: Done

   
   You can check the storegateway HTTP endpoint at ```http://<STORE-GATEWAY-ENDPOINT>/store-gateway/tenant/<TENANT-NAME>/blocks``` and you should be able to see the uploaded blocks there.
  

> > **Note**: It is recommeneded to run all the above steps in a **screen** command to avoid any interruptions as these may take time depending on the amount of data to be processed.

Reviewer 2: This suggestion may be more useful at the beginning of the procedure.

```suggestion
> **Note**: It is recommeneded to run all the above steps in a **screen** or **tmux** session to avoid any interruptions, as these may take long time depending on the amount of data to be processed.
```

Author: Done

    
    Once the copy process is done, inspect the blocks in the bucket to ensure it's valid from Thanos perspective.
    
    ```bash
    thanos tools bucket inspect \
        --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml
    ```

2) Remove the downsampled blocks

   Mimir doesn't understand the downsampled blocks(ie. blocks with non-zero Resolution field in meta.json file) in Thanos. Therefore we need to remove the 5m and 1h downsampled blocks from this bucket.
   
   Mark the downsampled blocks for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket retention \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --retention.resolution-1h=2h \
       --retention.resolution-5m=2h \
       --retention.resolution-raw=0d
   ```
   Cleanup the blocks marked for deletion.
   
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
3) Remove the duplicated blocks

   If two replicas of Prometheus instancesare deployed for HA, then only upload the blocks from one of the replicas and drop the other.
   
   ```bash
   # Get list of all blocks in the bucket
   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \

>        --output=tsv >> blocks.tsv

Reviewer 2: Using `>>` appends to the file. Is that intended? File may contain blocks from previous run, and then they will be processed multiple times.

   cat blocks.tsv| grep prometheus_replica=<PROMETHEUS-REPLICA-TO-DROP> \
       | awk '{print $1}' >> blocks_to_drop.tsv
       
   # Mark found blocks for deletion
   for ID in $(cat blocks_to_drop.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket mark \
          --marker="deletion-mark.json" \
          --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
          --details="Removed as duplicate" \
          --id $ID
   done
   ```
   
   > **Note**: Replace **prometheus_replica** with the unique label that would differentiate prometheus replicas in your setup.

   Again cleanup the duplicate blocks marked for deletion.
  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **ProTip!**: If you want to visualize what exactly is happening in the blocks with respect to the source of blocks, labels, compaction levels, etc, you can use the below command to get the output as CSV and import it to a google sheet.
   > ```bash 
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket-prod.yaml \
   >     --output=csv >> thanos-blocks.csv
   > ```

4) Relabel the blocks with external labels

>    Relabel the blocks with the required external labels. Create a rewrite config like the following:

Reviewer 2: We should point out what labels to use: basically external labels found in the blocks.

How does one check which external labels block have, and whether they are the same across all blocks?

For example something like this can show which labels are used, and how many different combinations are there:

```
for FILE in $(gsutil ls 'gs://<bucket>/meta.json'); do
  gsutil cat $FILE | jq --compact-output --sort-keys .thanos.labels
done | sort | uniq -c
```

Author: Just before step 4, I added a protip block where we export the details of the blocks as CSV. If we import the CSV into a google sheet, we will be able to see all the labels available and we can apply filters to get the different combinations as well.  Wouldn't that be useful?

   - action: replace
     target_label: "<LABEL-KEY>"
     replacement: "<LABEL-VALUE"
   ```
   
   Perform the rewrite dry run to confirm all work well.
   
   ```bash
   # Get list of all blocks in the bucket after removing the depuplicate and downsampled blocks.
   thanos tools bucket inspect \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --output=tsv >> blocks-to-rewrite.tsv
   
   # Check if rewrite of the blocks with external labels is working as expected.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --dry-run \
           --id $ID
   done
   ```
   
   After confirming that the rewrite is working as expected in **--dry-run**, you can apply the changes with the **--no-dry-run** flag.
   
   ```bash
   # Rewrite the blocks with external labels and mark the original blocks for deletion.
   for ID in $(cat blocks-to-rewrite.tsv)
   do
       thanos tools bucket rewrite  \
           --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
           --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
           --no-dry-run \

>            --delete-blocks 

Reviewer 2: Missing ` \` at the end of line here.

   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:18.471471014Z caller=compactor.go:42 msg="processed 90.00% of 701243 series"
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:21.536267363Z caller=compactor.go:42 msg="processed 100.00% of 701243 series"
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:21.536466158Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1222 msg="wrote new block after modifications; flushing" source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:28.675240198Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1231 msg="uploading new block" source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.922348564Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1241 msg=uploaded source=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH new=01GF0ZWPWGEPHG5NV79NH9KMPV
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.979696873Z caller=block.go:203 msg="block has been marked for deletion" block=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.979832767Z caller=tools_bucket.go:1249 msg="rewrite done" IDs=01GEGWPME2187SVFH63G8DH7KH
   level=info ts=2022-10-10T13:05:38.980197796Z caller=main.go:161 msg=exiting
   ```
   
   

>    Cleanup the original blocks which are marked for deletion.

Reviewer 2: (Thanks to using `--delete-blocks` in the previous step, perhaps worth noting?)

Author: Yes. I have added a line to talk about the significance of the flag.

  
   ```bash
   thanos tools bucket cleanup \
       --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
       --delete-delay=0
   ```
  
   > **Note**: If there are multiple prometheus clusters and relabelling each of them parallely would speed up the entire process.
   > Get the blocks ids of the blocks that are responsible for the cluster and write a for loop to iterate over them.
   > ```bash
   > thanos tools bucket inspect \
   >     --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
   >     --output=tsv \
   >     | grep <PROMETHEUS-CLUSTER-NAME> \
   >     | awk '{print $1}' > prod-blocks.tsv
   >```
  
   >```bash
   > for ID in `cat prod-blocks.tsv`
   > do
   >     thanos tools bucket rewrite  \
   >        --objstore.config-file bucket.yaml \
   >        --rewrite.to-relabel-config-file relabel-config.yaml \
   >        --delete-blocks \
   >        --no-dry-run \

>    >        --id $ID \         

Reviewer 2: Extra ` \` on the line here.

Author: Removed the extra \.

1) Copy the blocks from Thanos's bucket to an Intermediate bucket

   Create an intermediate object storage bucket(S3,GCS,etc.) in your cloud provider where you can copy the historical blocks and work on them before uploading to the Mimir bucket.
   

>    > **Note**: It is recommeneded to run all the above steps in a **screen** command to avoid any interruptions as these may take time depending on the amount of data to be processed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   > **Note**: It is recommeneded to run all of the following steps in a **screen** or **tmux** command to avoid any interruptions as these may take time depending on the amount of data to be processed.
```

Reviewer: @pstibrany and @Leegin-darknight, I have updated this suggestion to a tip and tweaked the phrases.

Author: @osg-grafana I have updated the PR with the changes suggested. Can you please review?

   >        --id $ID \         
   > done
   >```
 
5) Remove external labels from meta.json
   
   Mimir compactor will not be able to compact the blocks with external labels in their meta.json. Therefore these external labels have to be  removed before copying them to the Mimir bucket.
   
   ```bash
   # Create a folder named "orig".
   mkdir -p orig
   
   # Copy the meta.json file from all the blocks to orig folder in your local machine excluding the index and chunk folders.
   gsutil -m rsync -r -x '.*(index|chunks|debug).*' "gs://{Intermediate Mimir bucket}/" orig/
   ```
   
   Use the below script to remove the labels from the meta.json.
   
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash
   # Description: Update Thanos external labels
   # Create a folder called output
   mkdir -p output
   
   # Get all meta.json file under the orig folder
   find orig -name 'meta.json' |
   while read orig; do
     block="$(echo "${orig}" | cut -f2 -d'/')"
     tmpfile=$(mktemp)
   
     # use jq to delete the labels from the meta.sjon file

>      jq 'del(.thanos.labels.<LABEL-KEY-1>, .thanos.labels.<LABEL-KEY-2), .thanos.labels.<LABEL-KEY-3>)' "${orig}" > "${tmpfile}"

Reviewer 2: We can delete entire `.thanos.labels` section, not individual just labels.

Can we simplify the script? For example this would work as well:

```sh
for FILE in $(gsutil ls 'gs://<bucket>/*/meta.json'); do
    # Back up original meta.json file.
    gsutil cp $FILE $FILE.orig
    # Remove Thanos labels section from meta.json file.
    gsutil cat $FILE | jq 'del(.thanos.labels)' | gsutil cp - $FILE
done
```

Author: The reason why I avoided doing these changes from the gcloud command line is that when I do it from the local machine. I would have more control over the changes taking place. We can delete the entire labels section but do we need to simplify the script to this level as it's not showing any output until it's done if we have a lot of blocks in the gcs bucket.
